Langu,Language
Music,Music & SFX
TarlacHistory1,In Tarlac, you can find a blend of cultures, with Pangasinense culture to the north, Ilocano influence from Nueva Ecija to the east, Tagalog from Zambales to the west, and finally, Kapampangan from the south.
TarlacHistory2,There are stories and legends about the origin of the name Tarlac. The most well-known tale traces it back to the Aeta word Malatarlak, which refers to the coarse cogon grass that surprised the Aeta people when they first walked the land that would become Tarlac. The Aeta were the earliest inhabitants of Luzon, leading a nomadic lifestyle in search of food.
TarlacHistory3,The land of Tarlac was formed when volcanic eruptions created the Zambales Range. Initially, this part of the Zambales Range was an island separated from the rest of Luzon by a strait between Lingayen Gulf and Manila Bay. Due to ongoing volcanic activity, sand gradually accumulated on the Zambales Range above the sea's surface. This gave rise to the Province of Tarlac, a vast flat land that is part of the expansive plains of Luzon. Some of these extensive plains turned into lakes where canoes sailed during the rainy season from Manila Bay to Lingayen Gulf.
TarlacHistory4,Despite these plains having formed millions of years ago, Tarlac is a relatively young province in historical terms. It was the last province to be organized under Spanish rule in Central Luzon, and until 1874, it was part of Pangasinan and Pampanga.
TarlacHistory5,Nevertheless, the province granted itself one of the eight rays of the sun on the Philippine flag, symbolizing the first provinces to revolt against Spain in 1896. Tarlac is historic for its role in the country's struggle for independence. In March 1899, it was declared a seat of power by the First Philippine Republic under its first President, General Emilio Aguinaldo, when he fled from the former capital, Malolos, Bulacan. However, this only lasted for a month before he was pursued by the Americans to Nueva Ecija. In November 1899, it fell into American hands.
TarlacHistory6,During World War II, Camp O'Donell in Capas became synonymous with the Bataan Death March, where Filipino and American soldiers surrendered to the Japanese in 1942. It didn't regain its freedom until 1945 when military forces liberated Camp O'Donell and rescued the prisoners of war in Capas.
TarlacHistory7,In the decades that followed, the province experienced significant development, making it one of the progressive provinces in Central Luzon. The brief and straightforward account of Tarlac's colorful history is far from complete. It endured various challenges throughout its history, including earthquakes, cholera, epidemics, major fires, severe floods, and other calamities. Tarlac continues to write its history.
TarlacHistory8,Over the years, Tarlac has proven its ability to overcome wars, economic challenges, political shifts, and more, as it continually emerges as a stronger and more beautiful Tarlac, ready to face the challenges of the future.
AnaoH1,Anao is the smallest town in terms of land area and has a long history, being organized as a municipality on March 16, 1870. However, its history predates this municipal status. The area that now comprises Anao was originally part of Pangasinan but was later incorporated into the Province of Tarlac during the Spanish rule in the early 1800s. At that time, the land was mostly uninhabited, with creeks and lush vegetation, including balete trees, lining the creek banks. The first settlers, migrating southward from the Ilocos Region, are believed to have come from Paoay, a municipality in Ilocos Norte. They settled along the creek banks and began clearing the land for agriculture, attracting more people from the north to settle in the area.
AnaoH2,As Anao's population and physical area grew over the years, the residents submitted a petition in 1870 for their barangay to be converted into a municipality, which was approved. However, during the revolution, the municipality faced challenges in maintaining its status, leading to another petition for reversion to a barangay of Paniqui, which was also approved. In 1899, Anao regained its municipal status for the second time and became a 7th class municipality.
AnaoH3,There are various accounts regarding the origin of Anao's name. One explanation suggests it comes from the Pangasinan word danao, meaning pond, lagoon, or shallow water. Some residents believe it is derived from anaoang, a native boiler used for cooking sugarcane juice into sugar. Perhaps the most popular version of the town's name is that it comes from anahaw, a type of palm tree that was abundant in the area during its early history.
AnaoH4,Despite being the smallest in population and land area, Anao is classified as one of the fifth class municipalities in the Province of Tarlac.
BambanH1,The municipality of Bamban, established during the Spanish regime, was originally founded out of a vast jungle inhabited by mixed settlers comprising the aborigines or Negritos, the Lambal Aetas, and Christian native immigrants from Pampanga and the Tagalog provinces. As early as 1700, the Agustinian Missionaries from Mabalacat, Pampanga came to spread the Roman Catholic faith and later to civilize the natives.
BambanH2,On August 16, 1876, the ecclesiastical authorities officially established the Mission de Pueblos. The Augustinian Recollects or Orden Recoletos de San Agustin was in charge of the Mission. The Missionaries received support from the Spanish Government, and in 1800, the Mission or Settlement received official recognition from the Spanish Government and was named the town Bamban, which was derived from an aquatic plant found abundant in the fertile valleys. Bamban was originally part of Pampanga, with Villa de Bacolor as its capital. However, with the creation of the Province of Tarlac in 1894, Bamban was separated from its mother province of Pampanga and became part of Tarlac province.
BambanH3,Bamban played a historical role during the Filipino-Spanish and later the Filipino-American revolutions when, on June 6, 1899, it was proclaimed the revolutionary capital of the Philippines by Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo. In recognition of this historical event, the local legislative body, the Sangguniang Bayan, passed Special Ordinance No. 1, series of 1999, declaring June 6 as Bamban Day.
CamillingH1,On the western reaches of Tarlac Province lies the historic town of Camiling. Early in the eighteenth century, this thriving community was a sitio of Paniqui, contrary to the popular belief that it was a a part of Bayambang, Pangasinan. The discovery of a Spanish document in 1937 attested to the fact that it really belonged to Paniqui. Further evidence shows that in the same document, it was stated that the inhabitants of Camiling paid their tributes to Paniqui. In the beginning, the community was a vast area of cogon growth interposed with thick forestalls areas stretching far as the Zambales mountain ranges. A wide river cut peacefully through it.
CamillingH2,The early inhabitants of the place were known as  Aetas  who depended as for their living on fruit trees and by hunting and fishing. With the coming of the Pangasinenses and lIocanos from the north ,the  Aetas  who used to roam freely in the wilderness obliged themselves to move in to the interior. The new settlers first occupied the swampy land, now known as  Cacamilingan  on the opposite side of the river. With the passage of time, these settlers moved to the opposite shore considering that most often, disastrous floods were visiting the present site. To this new location, the residents therein built a little church or  visita  with the villagers taking  ST. MICHAEL  as the Patron Saint.
CamillingH3,The town Camiling owes its name after the name of a tree called  CAMIRING  which grew abundantly in the wilderness. The letter  R  in  CAMIRING  was changed to  L  for its liquid sound. As this settlement attained progress, CAMILlNG became a District Commission from 1834-1837. It was founded by Don Francisco Soriano, an adventurous barangay leader who incidentally became the town s first District Commissioner, followed by Domingo Claudio, Bernabe Bugarin and Pascual Cabacungan.
CamillingH4,In 1838, Camiling became an independent town, formally separated from the mother town of Paniqui and with Don Vicente Galsim as the first Governadorcillo. Thirty-eight (38) others followed him. Don Buenaventura Torres was the last to serve under the Spanish regime and the first Presidente Municipal under the Revolutionary Government by Aguinaldo. Of historical importance, the Camiling Catholic Convent was the death place of Gen. Pedro Pedroche and his men for being accused as rebels.
CamillingH5,CAMILlNG is a first class municipality in the western part of the province of Tarlac in the Philippines. It is about 150 kilometers north-northwest of Manila, and about 50 kilometers south-southwest of Dagupan City in Pangasinan. It is the commercial center of an area composed of about eight (8) towns, and borders the Province of Pangasinan. It is the gateway to central and western Pangasinan through the Romulo Highway (formerly Highway 13). It borders San Clemente on the west, Bayambang from the north, Sta. Ignacia and Mayantoc to the south and Paniqui by the east.
CapasH1,Created in 1710, Capas is among the oldest towns of Tarlac together with Bamban (1710), Paniqui (1574) and Tarlac (1686). Its creation was justified by numerous settlements which were already established in the river banks of Cutcut River since the advent of the eighteenth century. The settlements belonged to the domain of Pagbatuan and Gudya; two sitios united by Capitan Mariano Capiendo when he founded the municipality. Historical records suggest three versions on how Capas got its name. The first version, as told, was originated from capas-capas, the  edible flower  similar to that of the caturay or the melaguas that abundantly grew along the Cutcut river banks. The second version, accordingly, was adapted from a  cotton tree  called capas, in Aeta dialect. The third version suggested that it was derived from the first three letters of the surnames of the town s early settlers, namely: Capitulo, Capitly, Capiendo, Capuno, Caponga, Capingian, Caparas, Capera, Capunpue, Capit, Capil, Capunfuerza, Capunpun, Caputol, Capul and Capan. Assertively, they were called  caps  or  capas  in the local language.
CapasH2,Between 1946-1951, registered barangays of Capas were Lawy, O Donnell, Aranguren, Sto. Domingo, Talaga, Sta. Lucia, Bueno, Sta. Juliana, Sampucao, Calingcuan, Dolores and Manga, which were the 12 barrios during Late President Elpidio Quirino issued the Executive Order No. 486 providing  for the collection and compilation of historical data regarding barrios, towns, cities and provinces.  Today, Capas constitutes 20 barangays including all 12 except Calingcuan was changed to Estrada, Sampucao to Maruglu, Sto. Domingo was divided in two and barangays such as Sta. Rita, Sto. Rosario, Cristo Rey, Cubcub, Cutcut I & II, and Talaga were added.
ConcepcionH1,In 1860, the towns of Concepcion and Magalang comprised a single town named San Bartolome (presently a barangay of Concepcion), which was a military Commandancia of Pampanga under the Spanish regime.
ConcepcionH2,A catastrophic flood devastated the whole settlement of San Bartolome in 1863 and its residents were left with no other choice but to abandon the place. Divided as to where they were to resettle, some went north and others went south.
ConcepcionH3,The first group, headed by Don Pablo Luciano, the Governadorcillo, organized a new settlement on the slopes of Mt. Arayat further south and named the settlement after him. Eventually, the place was renamed Magalang.
ConcepcionH4,The second group who took refuge in the north comprised the Santoses, Laxamanas, Salvadors, Yumuls, Castros, Dizons, Pinedas, Felicianos, Aquinos, Corteses, Bermudezes, Perezes, Punsalangs and many others, and settled in a place (now called Santo Nino) then occupied by the Lindos and the Amuraos (Don Esquolastiquo Amurao and Don Gaston Amurao).
ConcepcionH5,Most of the settlers became dissatisfied with the place, as it abounded with snakes and was scarce in water. They moved further south to a place now known as Concepcion. The settlers began clearing the land and built huts and roads. After several years, they named the place Concepcion after the Immaculate Conception, who was believed to possess power over the snakes that abound in the area.
GeronaH1,The history of the Municipality of Gerona can be traced back to the reign of the Spaniards when the Dominican Missionaries in the Philippines started to propagate the Catholic faith in the whole archipelago in 1704. The Dominicans placed the Vicar of Malanguey (now Bayambang, Pangasinan) is charged with the mission of converting the local inhabitants of  Paontalon  (original name of Gerona) to become Catholics. In 1722, Paontalon was recognized as a small village and became part of the Municipality of Paniqui then under the Province of Pangasinan.
GeronaH2,In the early part of the nineteenth century, the inhabitants of Paontalon started to flourish due to the migration of people from the Northern Provinces of Luzon in search of greater opportunities. It is believed that the first group of people who came and settled in Gerona are the Ilocanos and Pangasinenses.
GeronaH3,The people settled on the hill by the skirt of a little forest that the Pangasinan folks named  Barug  meaning little forest or  Pugo  in Ilocano. It is believed that Barug was adopted as the name of the newfound settlement due to the fact that the Pangasinense outnumbered the Ilocanos.
GeronaH4,In 1765, the name Barug was officially changed to Gerona in honor of the Spanish Governor-General Narciso Claveria, who hails from Girona, Spain. Girona is a city in northern Catalonia, Spain, at the confluence of the Ter, Onyar, Galligants, and G ell rivers.
GeronaH5,It was not until the year 1844 when Gerona finally became an independent town but without a Gobernadorcillo. The Don Anacleyo Melegrito, the town s first Gobernadorcillo, was only appointed in 1845.
GeronaH6,When Tarlac Province was founded in 1873 by the Spanish Central Government, Gerona was one of the towns which were included in the new Province of Tarlac.
LapazH1,The early history of La Paz is told in a legend. Once upon a time there was an old, old pueblo called Cama Juan situated right along the bank of the Chico River bordering the province of Tarlac and Nueva Ecija. When the Chico River overflowed during a storm, a great flood swept the entire pueblo at an unholy hour when the entire populace was asleep. The flood left in its wake a picture of total devastation claiming scores of human life.
LapazH2,This forced the inhabitants of Cama Juan to evacuate the place and look for a better place to settle in. The old site (Cama Juan) is known as Balen Melakwan or Abandoned Town.
LapazH3,The inhabitants chose a field of evergreen grass and shubbery, which they named Matayumtayum. Hard work and determination enabled the town to prosper and in time peace and order reigned in the settlement.
LapazH4,Towards the end of the nineteenth century, Francisco Macabulos and Captain Mariano Ignacio selected a more centrally located site for the future town to be known as La Paz. But La Paz existed then only as a barrio of the town of Tarlac until 1892. When it was separated from the latter and rechristened in honor of its patron saint Nuestra Senora de La Paz y Buen Viaje. Its emergence as a new town gave its citizens a chance to run their own government with don Martin Aquino as the first Governadorcillo.
LapazH5,In due time, due to the heroic exploits of its own force La Paz was made first seat of the revolutionary government of the province of Tarlac during the Spanish regime with Gen. Francisco Makabulos as its first provincial governor.
MayantocH1,On the western part of Tarlac Province nestles the Municipality of Mayantoc. It is bounded on the west by the Zambales Mountain Ranges, on the south by the Municipality of San Jose, on the north by the towns of San Clemente and Camiling and on the west by Sta. Ignacia.
MayantocH2,In the dawn of history, what came to be known as Mayantoc today was once a densely forested area, peopled by a nomadic tribe, our brother Aetas. It was teeming with flora and fauna where a variety of a vine called  yantok  abounds. When settlers who were attracted by the beauty and rich natural resources came they referred to this place as  May Yontok . This is how the place got its name.
MayantocH3,Formerly, it was a barrio Camiling. The appointment of Gov. General Francis Burton Harrison, who believed in the increased Filipino participation in the government, and in the Enactment of the Jones Law otherwise known as the Philippine Autonomy Act, inspired the illiustrious leaders, Don Francisco P. Santos and Don Adriano Tolentino to campaign and petition for the conversion of Mayantoc into a town.
MayantocH4,As required for township, there must be a school, market, a church and a  presidencia . So, Don Francisco Pascual Santos and his wife Do a Ana Versoza donated parcels of lands for these purposes and attached these documents to their petition. It is today the site of the Mayantoc Elementary School, the town s public market, plaza and auditorium and the Roman Catholic Church. The house of Don Adriano Tolentino become the  presidencia .
MayantocH5,With the help of the Provincial Governor, Gov. Ernesto Gardiner, Rep. Luis Morales, House Speaker Sergio Osme a, Sr., Gov. Gen. Francis Burton Harrison created Executive Order No. 96 on December 1916 creating Mayantoc as the 16th town of Tarlac and was formally inaugurated on January 1,1917.
MayantocH6,The first appointed Municipal President was Antonio Sanz but was ousted by a petition filed by Don Antonio Malong, Don Miguel Celebrados and other Councilors due to aristocratic  Kastillan Ways . In an election held on the same year, Don Francisco P. Santos won and became the first elected Municipal President.
MayantocH7,From that time, 100 years since Don Francisco P.Santos led successfully the affairs and development of the newly created Municipality, a long line of well-meaning and well-intentioned individuals that best signify the Mayantocque an s capacity of greatness in public service and leadership have successfully and successively led the town in the march to progress.
MoncadaH1,In the early part of the year 1860, four family heads of barrio Magaspac, Gerona, Tarlac namely: Don Juan Sagun, Don Pedro Sapon, Don Victoriano Avillanosa and Don Agustin Germinal packed up their belongings and hurriedly left their homes together with their families. They have incurred the hatred of the Spanish curate of Gerona, Fr. Modesto Perez, who was feared for his irritable nature and fierce vindictiveness. They decided to evacuate Magaspac to escape from the ire of the curate.?
MoncadaH2,Travelling northward for days through primeval forests, the refugees went past the old town of Paniqui. Then they took a northwesterly course and ultimately reached Sitio Caarosipan, nestling amidst the vast wastelands and within sight of scenic Morong Creek. Here the sturdy pioneers decided to stay. They noted with great admiration and interest the verdant environment dotted here and there by a big and stately arosip trees, the luscious fruit of which fascinated birds which fed with gusto as they chirped and fluttered all day.
MoncadaH3,Not long after wards, the rainy season set in. After dreary days of intermittent rainfall, Sitio Caarosipan was inundated to the utter disappointment of the prospective residents. Undaunted by Mother Nature s challenge, they moved out for good and repaired to higher ground, this time hitting Sitio Payacan (now Barrio Capaoayan) four kilometers east of Caarosipan. Here they built better homes and made wider clearing for their work animals and domestic pets. Since then, they called Caarosipan, Barriodaan, a contraction of the Ilocano phrase  barrio nga daan . ?
MoncadaH4,Convinced of the fertility and favorable elevation of the surrounding terrain, the four family heads lost no time in enticing other probable settlers from Gerona and Paniqui to try their luck with them. Not long afterwards, uninvited immigrants from Pangasinan and the Ilocos provinces arrived in Payacan. Many of these immigrants came from Paoay, Ilocos Norte hence, the present name of Barrio Capaoayan. Within a period of two years, the population of the settlement rose to sixty-four families. The municipal authorities of Paniqui, of which Payacan was then a part, thought of converting the sitio into a barrio. When this plan was finally realized, they selected Don Antonio Longa as teniente del barrio. He held the position up to 1862.
MoncadaH5,As San Ramon showed signs of advancement and progress, a Christian Chinese who was a merchant by calling, came to try his luck in the place. Through sheer industry and thrift, he soon emerged as the most prosperous and pivotal entity in the barrio. His influence among the residents gained headway with his material prosperity. He stirred the interest and  imagination of civic-minded citiizens to work with him for the conversion of San Ramon into an independent Municipality. Misfortune befell the entire scheme when the amiable Chinese died without realizing his pet dream. Nevertheless, the spirit of the movement did not perish with him. He ha an adopted son with the Christian name of Vicente Tintiangco who as also a full-blooded Chinese. As was the ante-mortem request of his dead benefactor, Don Vicente pursued with equal vigor and determination the succeeding phase of the undertaking.?
MoncadaH6,Through his persistent machination, he succeeded in having San Ramon into a full-fledged municipality by virtue of a proclamation by the Spanish Military General of Tarlac province, Don Julian Ocon. This very historic event took place on July 1, 1875. The infant municipality was named MONCADA in honor of a certain influential nobility in Spain. The first town executive of Moncada was Don Sinforoso Marquez who rendered service from 1875-1877. As such, his title was Governadorcillo y Juez Local Ex-Officio.
MoncadaH7,In recognition of his meritorious service and sacrifices for the commoner, Don Vicente Tintiangco was posthumously awarded the diploma of honor and a medal of merit by the GOVERNADOR Y CAPITAN GENERAL DE FILIPINAS, Don Joaquin Jovellar Y Soler in an elaborate ceremony on July 14, 1884. Don Fruto Tintiangco, one of the three sons of the Chinese founder of Moncada, stood to accept the much-deserved awards.
PaniquiH1,The birth of Paniqui could be traced way back in 1712 when the provincial government of Pangasinan sent a group of men south of Bayambang, Pangasinan for the expansion of the Christian Faith. The pioneering group was led by two brothers, Raymundo and Manuel Paragas of Dagupan and established the Local Government in a Sitio called  manggang marikit  (mango of an unmarried woman) now apart of Guimba, Nueva Ecija. Surprisingly, in this sitio, sere a great number of mammals called by Ilocanos  pampaniki  and it was from this term that the name Paniqui was derived.
PaniquiH2,An uprising led by Caragay during the early part of 1720 forced the Local Government in  manggang marikit  to abandon the place and to evacuate for lowland called Acocolao, a place two kilometers west of the present Poblacion. It was a historical sitio where the first Moro in the Philippines, Sultan Ali Mudin was baptized in 1750 and embraced Christianity.
PaniquiH3,Paniqui was a sprawling town that covered a wide area that time. Some of the barrios that formerly comprised Paniqui were  San Roque  now Cuyapo;  Barong  now Gerona;  San Jose De Camiling  now Camiling;  Bani  now Ramos;  San Ramon  now Moncada; and Anao.
PaniquiH4,The period between 1750 and 1896 were painful years of Spanish tyranny and oppression. Because of the insurrectos and sometimes bandits conveniently sprouted among the people that made sporadic attacks upon the Conquistadores. These attacks on the Spaniards, who came on the islands bringing the Sword and the Cross, were marred by cholera and smallpox epidemics punctuated by floods and typhoons.
PaniquiH5,However, a group of Paniqui patriots, welded together by a common consciousness of oneness, unselfish devotion for freedom and spurred by Spanish ruthless tyranny, organized a legitimate segment of the Katipunan on January 12, 1896 which is far cry from the bandits that used to harass the Spaniards.
PaniquiH6,These dauntless men made daring exploits, unrecorded in the history of the Katipunan, the most prominent of which was the ambuscade of Spanish soldiers along the road going to Anao and killing a great number of them. These incidents made a prelude to the end of the Spanish occupation in Paniqui. The advent of American occupation saw a happy transition from the almost aristocratic and enigmatic characteristic of Spanish conquistadores to the democratic way of life under American tutelage.
PaniquiH7,In Paniqui, the Japanese were confronted with an enemy which is mighty in its fury and relentless in its vengeance. The members of the Guerilla force under Col. Maristela and aiding local troops of the Philippine Commonwealth Army military units was dedicated their unflinching loyalty to the cherished ideals of their motherland the Philippines by establishing a security cordon of the people under the very nose of the Japanese. The Guerilla outfit preserved the landmarks of Paniqui like the sugar central, municipal building, public school buildings and practically all the unpretentious private homes. One of the bloodiest chapters of this guerilla outfit was recorded on May 8, 1945, when the Guerilla forces were annihilated two platoons of Japanese Soldiers at Sta. Ines where 52 sons of Nippon were killed. The arrival are came back of the local Filipino soldiers under the Philippine Commonwealth Army and Philippine Constabulary units turns to helping guerrillas are become the liberated the town during the war.
PaniquiH8,Today, the people of Paniqui, welded by the same persuasion that held them together during the most trying moments in history, are working again, hand in hand to make their native town, the progressive, respected, and thriving community that is.
PuraH1,It was during the Spanish regime when migrants coming from the Ilocos Region ( Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur and La Union) moved southward to look for arable lands. These early settlers were forced to abandon their place of birth because it consisted of narrow coastal plains and highlands where agriculture is not a promising means of livelihood. These migrants who were close relatives (brothers, and sisters, cousins, uncles and aunts) decided to stay on the northeastern part of a future province later known to be Tarlac. The place at that time was forest, and so the migrants took the plains of clearing the area preparatory for agricultural activities.
PuraH2,Because of kinship, they considered themselves pure Ilocano settlers of the place, and they unanimously agreed to dub their settlement  PURA.  It seems that the place where the settlers established their settlement was originally a part of Barrio de Villa, then a part of the Municipality of Gerona. The settlement gradually grew until the leaders felt that it was ripe for township and filed a petition to the proper authorities to have the settlement converted to a town. In 1877, through the initiative and efforts of Fr. Pedro Graneta, then the parish priest of Gerona, Pura won and enjoyed its bid for political status as pueblo or town in 1877, by the virtue of Spanish laws.
PuraH3,However, Pura s recognition and political status as a town did not last long, for unknown reasons. The town was reverted into its original status as a barrio in 1903, again under the political jurisdiction of the Municipality of Gerona. Five years later or in 1908, Pura s township status was re-established with the late Don Felix Melegrito as its Chief Executive or president. In 1919, during the second term of Don Felix Melegrito, about 2,000 hectares of agricultural land at the eastern portion of Pura were ceded and became territorial parts of Guimba, Nueva Ecija, by virtue of a court decision establishing the territorial delineation separating the town of Pura, Tarlac, and Guimba, Nueva Ecija. These are now parts constituting the barangays of San Miguel, Medina, Maybobon, and Susubaen. Since then, the Municipality has sixteen (16) barangays. At present, the Municipal Leadership is under the reins of Hon. Concepcion A. Zarate, M.D.
RamosH1,The history of Ramos is intertwined with the migration of Ilocano settlers from Santa Narvacan, Batac during the mid-19th century. These settlers were drawn to the fertile plains in the area, which had abundant grasses and the presence of a tree known as Bani, which was believed to have medicinal properties. As these settlers established their community, they identified it with the medicinal Bani tree and officially named it Bani, becoming one of the barrios of the town of Paniqui.
RamosH2,The residents of Bani had long aspired to become an independent town. Paniqui, where their administration was based, was located seven kilometers away and was seen as too remote to effectively address the welfare of Bani. The villagers found it troublesome to travel long distances to transact business in the town hall of Paniqui, and they believed that their barrio was capable of running its own affairs.
RamosH3,During the Philippine Revolution, many residents of Bani responded to the call to arms, with notable figures like Don Bernabe Oteysa being chief local campaigners for the Katipunan Movement. The volunteers formed a group under the command of Commandante Alejandro Tolongan of Pura, with their headquarters at Sitio Bangkag under District No. 5. They were sent as reinforcements to various areas, including Balintawak, Calumpit, Tarlac, and Dagupan.
RamosH4,When the American administration was established, Don Alfonso Ramos was appointed as Tarlac's first Provincial Governor. Barrio leaders in Bani, including Carlos Filieu, Vicente Mauricio, and Magdalino Linsao, submitted a petition to the Provincial Board of Tarlac, requesting that their barrio be elevated to the status of a town. However, their initial request was denied due to missing required items. Subsequent petitions by the residents were also unsuccessful.
RamosH5,It was not until the second gubernatorial term of Don Manuel de Leon that Bani was formally designated as a town in 1919. The town was renamed Ramos in honor of their benefactor, Don Alfonso Ramos, who had initiated the town's establishment. Carlos Felieu, who had spearheaded the movement, became the town's first Presidente Municipal in 1921, with Pio Caba ero as Vice Presidente Municipal. Municipal Councilors included Nicasio Reginaldo, Francisco Ilingan, and Luis Aquino.
RamosH6,Among the early settlers in the area were the Mariano brothers (Vicente, Paulino, and Alfonso), Silverio Oteysa, Carlos Filieu, Valentin Nolasco, Paulino Baydin, Claro Caspe, Federico Balabat, Benidicto Mara on, and Maximo Mangabat, who became the first Cabesa de Barangay. Others like Maximo Ramos and Alejo Macaraeg settled in nearby areas, which later became known as Coral Iloco. Another group, led by Miguel Bacting, Joseph and Crisanto Tanduan, Baldomero Reguindin, Gavino Francisco, and Benidicto Mara on, settled in a location a kilometer away from Bani, which is now known as Toledo.
SanClementeH1,The town of San Clemente was created during the colonial period by virtue of a Royal Spanish Decree on November 14, 1876.
SanClementeH2,Story passed from one generation to another indicate that this town was so named as a bestowal of people s gratitude to the heroics of a figure who emerged with a sword in hand battle-ready sentinel at the approach of the bridge separating Tarlac from Pangasinan. This giant figure scared the advancing bandits that saw them scampering in different directions. Thus, foiling the sinister attempt of these bad elements from ransacking the town as it was their usual operation during the time. Upon witnesses  account, the man was later identified with high degree of certainty as Saint Clement of Rome.
SanClementeH3,The Philippines  cessation to the U.S. in 1898 relegated the town to a mere barangay of Camiling for reason of underdevelopment. Two years later, however, civil government was restored throughout the archipelago. The inhabitants of San Clemente led by Don Jacinto Dumlao, made representations with higher authorities to re-establish the  municipality  status of the town. This objective they later on achieved during the latter part of 1914 by virtue of Act No. 82 of the Philippine Commission upon the express orders from President McKinley of the United States of America.
SanClementeH4,Records indicate that the early settlers of this town, said to be the Dumlao, Trinidad, Loria, Espiritu, Martin, etc., were mostly of the Ilocano stock coming from the Ilocos Region in a quest for better economic opportunities in the abundantly fertile agricultural lands. These prominent people are indeed endowed with the vision to transform their adopted abode into a wholesome place to live. Thus, local governance has always been viewed at the socio-economic development perspective. The local chief executive position then did not only entail the laborious task of administration but also the shelling-out of sizable pecuniary contributions to pursue a project   up to the extent of donating tracks of land for public utilization. The public plaza, market, municipal building, school buildings, church, etc. are constructed on donated lands.
SanClementeH5,Structures in the locality reminiscent of the past era of colonization such as church, school buildings, houses, bridges, etc. have gradually given way to the modern day s engineering designs for relative purposes. The venerable tradition of the Filipino hospitality however, remained alive and in practice   where every visitor is genially accorded the honored guest treatment.
SanClementeH6,These days, the descendants of the early families still maintain their residency to perpetuate the legacy of productivity left by their ancestors. Consciously instilled, industry, which characterizes their Ilocano predecessors, is likewise evident. Through the years, the industrious townspeople toiled enough to realize the economic sufficiency everyone aims for. Modesty aside, modern day technological advances for domestic comforts are ubiquitous in majority of the households. While at the outset, the people rely mainly on farming as a source of livelihood; nowadays, local labor resources have gone their way overseas for better and more lucrative opportunities to improve their lot.
SanClementeH7,The municipality owes its growth mainly to the industry of its townspeople and to the public officials who took the cudgel one after another in the quest for prosperity. The election held in 1915 catapulted the first highest municipal official by the title, Presidente Municipal, the equivalent of Municipal Mayor in today s structure.
SanClementeH8,The birth of San Clemente as a town may be traced as far back when the locality was a mere sitio of the old town of Camiling, and when those early pioneers made use of the kaingin system in cleaning the land which was once covered with dense forest.
SanClementeH9,The region is situated on the foothill of Zambales mountains where bushes are plentiful. Historical records on file in the municipality of San Clemente show that the early settlers of this town were mostly of the Ilocano stock who have come from Ilocos Norte and Ilocos Sur, as adventurers in pursuit of fertile agricultural lands.
SanClementeH10,To this day, descendants of these early pioneers families still live enjoying the fruits of their labors and sacrifices of their ancestors like the Dumlao Clans, Martins and others.
SanClementeH11,Boundary Dispute: This long continuing boundary dispute between the Province of Tarlac and Pangasinan, where each desires not to give the fight over the contested land (2,474 hectares) sandwiched between the two interested towns of Mangatarem and San Clemente. Both parties are presenting strong evidences to support their claims. The conflict then was in the hands of Malaca an where His Excellency, the President of the Republic entrusted the boundary dispute case to a technical committee created by him under administrative Order No. 232, dated January 29, 1970.
SanManuelH1,San Manuel is a small town situated along the MacArthur Highway in the province of Tarlac, Philippines. It is located at the northernmost tip of Tarlac, bordering the province of Pangasinan. When viewed from an elevated perspective, the town's shape resembles that of a marquise, and it is often considered the crown of Tarlac due to its unique location.
SanManuelH2,The majority of the residents in San Manuel, like those in the northern part of Tarlac, have their roots in Ilocandia. This can be attributed to the Ilocano Diaspora, which refers to the historical tendency of Ilocanos to migrate in search of better opportunities. Other Ilocanos from neighboring Pangasinan moved southward, and some from Zambales moved eastward to settle in San Manuel. They were drawn to the area by the vast plains, abundant forests, rich waterways, and abundant wildlife. These hopeful settlers decided to make San Manuel their permanent home and established a thriving community.
SanManuelH3,San Manuel's origins can be traced to the period when it was known as a Sister Municipality of Moncada, Tarlac. This status was granted during the governorship of Don Manuel De Leon, in whose honor the town was named. Another account suggests that Victoriano Castro, an Ilocano migrant, played a significant role in petitioning the Tarlac government to declare their settlement as an independent town in 1909. This marked the beginning of San Manuel as a distinct and thriving municipality in the province of Tarlac.
SantaIgnaH1,Before the settlers from the Ilocos province, led by a man whose family was  Madriaga  set feed on the soil of Sta. Ignacia, the locality was a mere prairie. Together with his companions they settled in a place named  Binaga  which now called Nabagbagan-Nambalan. The place was so called  Binaca  in view of the fact that thousands of cattle were herded in that locality.
SantaIgnaH2,As time went on, more immigrants from Cabugao, Sarrat, Tagudin, Bacarra, Badoc, Candon and Paoay, all towns in the Ilocos regions arrived with all their personal belongings placed in their covered carts.
SantaIgnaH3,According to Treasurer Jose Pedroche, a local historian, those early pioneers employed the kaingin systems in clearing the lands, which was densely covered with cogon and talahib. Cattle raising and little agriculture were the early industries of the place. Later, the land area cultivated gradually increased simultaneously with the increased population.
SantaIgnaH4,With the locality progressing, Binaca in 1845 became a barrio of Camiling with Don Manuel Natividad, its first Teniente Basal. In 1875, the barrio became a town with Don Felipe Cabugasa, its Gobernadorcillo. It was in the same year when Binaca was changed to Sta. Ignacia in honor of her patron saint.
SantaIgnaH5,During the period of development, Binaca has been the target of a series of attack. In 1851, a great number of ruffians visited the place and carried away work animals and personal belongings. To harass the residents, they even went to the extent of harming whoever resisted. The inhabitants were nevertheless discouraged and instead worked harder to make up for their losses. In 1888, robbers forced their way in town and looted private properties including the  Timbre del Tribunal  (official seal) which was, however, recovered during the administration of Capitan Municipal, Don Vicente Laoang, somewhere around the year 1894.
SantaIgnaH6,One of the most significant events that occurred at a later period, which should never be forgotten in the town s history, was when General Pedro Pedroche and his men attack the town at the height of the town fiesta. In the encounter, the chief of police, a brother-in-law of General Pedroche and three policemen and a number of civilians were killed from bullet wounds. The tragic event arose when the chief of police refused the offer of Gen. Pedroche that he is his adviser.
SantaIgnaH7,In 1896, don Eulogio Madriaga, and then Capitan Municipal received an order from the parish priest of Camiling to move the town nearer the mother town of Camiling for security reasons. Don Eulogio Madriaga as subordinate official has no other alternative but to obey orders, hence the transfer of the town from Nambalan to its present site.
SantaIgnaH8,Around the year 1899. During the administration of Don Manuel Briones, Presidente Municipal, the local revolutionary government was inaugurated in Sta. Ignacia but no sooner than that erstwhile Philippine Republic fell in favor of the Americans and new administration under the United States began
SantaIgnaH9,One of the first steps undertaken by the new governing powers was the re-organization of the municipalities in the province. On recommendation of the Philippine Commission of 1902 it was held that smaller towns, which cannot stand by themselves, were to be reverted into barrios, the same to be attached to towns close to them. Thus, Sta. Ignacia along with Pura, San Clemente, Mayantoc, Mariones, O Donnel and Murcia ceased to exist as towns. For almost ten years, since 1903, Sta. Ignacia remained a barrio of Camiling.
SantaIgnaH10,The people of Sta. Ignacia were not at ease and they were restless. At least they agitated with aims to regain what lost in them. Under the initiative of Don Silvestre Lacuin, popularly known as Don Beting together with his co-workers in the persons of Don Eulogio Madriaga, Don Alipio Pascasio, Don Santiago Aviguetero, Don Florencio Antonio and the incumbent Teniente Basal, Don Simeon Hilario and backed up by the sympathy of the people for their movements they had sought all legal means to regain the status loss of their beloved town.
SantaIgnaH11,In due course, they had met so many drawbacks but were never discouraged in their fight for the common cause despite stiff opposition of the Camiling Municipal Council as influenced by the Camiling s great like Don Gregorio Romulo, Gregorio Clemente and Don Benson.
SantaIgnaH12,Due to insistent demand, the people of Sta. Ignacia at last sought the intervention of the Honorable Provincial Board of Tarlac and which by sheer good luck; the petition thus presented was finally considered favorable.
VictoriaH1,The establishment of Victoria as a community can be traced back to the mid-1800s during the expansion of the Spanish regime northward from Manila. This coincided with the formation of nearby towns like Porac and Floridablanca (now part of Pampanga) and Tarlac (now Tarlac City). In the mid-1800s, people began settling in the area around a swamp or wetland in search of a place with abundant food resources.
VictoriaH2,By 1849, houses and small communities had started to emerge in the vicinity of the wetland. The largest settlement was known as Namitinan, which later became part of the earliest barrio formed in 1852, called San Vicente de Canarum. This name was derived from the wetland known as Canarum Lake.
VictoriaH3,It wasn't until March 28, 1855, with the signing of a decree by Spanish Governor General Manuel Crespo, that the barrio of San Vicente de Canarum was separated from Tarlac to become an independent pueblo (town) named Victoria. The name Victoria was chosen to commemorate the victorious battle of the faithful followers of Queen Isabela II of Spain over their European enemies.
VictoriaH4,Today, remnants of Victoria's Spanish history can still be observed in the well-preserved municipal building, several old houses featuring Spanish architecture, and various structures that were constructed more than a century ago.
TarlacTR1,Introducing Tarlac City Plazuela, a captivating new tourist attraction that combines history, entertainment, and meaningful experiences. This hidden gem silently witnessing different historic events of the past has undergone a remarkable transformation thanks to the visionary leadership of Mayor Cristy Angeles. Prepare to be enchanted as you delve into the rich Tarlac City?s heritage and enjoy a host of exciting new features. Nearby San Sebastian Chapel, right at the city center is where you could find the Plazuela. It is a simple park where you could sit and relax while enjoying the sunset; there are also available food stalls if you wish to grab some food while relaxing.
TarlacTR2,Sitting at the heart of Tarlac?s Capital is one of the oldest church in the province ? the San Sebastian Cathedral or more colloquially known as the Tarlac Cathedral. The parish has an interesting piece of history, the church has been there even before Tarlac became an independent province. It is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarlac. It was built in honor of Saint Sebastian in 1686. The Philippine Revolution Congress convened at the San Sebastian Cathedral in 1899.
TarlacTR3,Diwa ng Tarlac, located in the heart of Tarlac City, aims to highlight Filipino and Tarlaque? arts and culture. It serves as a venue for local artists to showcase their talents, crafts, and masterpieces and is currently the home to the permanent Historical Dioramas of the province. The office of the Tarlac Provincial Tourism can also be found in the building.
TarlacTR4,?Centre of town life for Tarlaque?s.? The park is located right in front of the imposing Capitol Building in Tarlac City. The park hosts a number of activities designed for all.
TarlacTR5,Kart City, your one-stop-shop for food, entertainment, and adventure located along McArthur Highway in Tarlac, Tarlac.Kart City is known for its World Class Karting facilities. The best about it is that it?s right in front of the SM City Tarlac, making it very accessible. This will be your newest destination for your family thanks to their kid-friendly facilities, which happens to include a playground.
TarlacTR6,The Aquino Center and Museum is one of the best places to visit when revisiting the history of the Philippines. It is located in Hacienda Luisita, San Miguel, Tarlac City. It is established as a tribute to the two beloved Filipino icons of democracy, the late Sen. Benigno ?Ninoy? Aquino Jr. and his wife, the late President Corazon ?Cory? Aquino. Its main feature is the Museum, which houses photos and memorabilia of Ninoy and Cory Aquino. It also chronicles the Filipino's proud recent history: their fight to restore democracy and their shining example of People Power that inspired the world.
AnaoTR1,The concept of initiating an Ylang Ylang processing center started in the 1980s by the current mayor during that time. They planted young trees nearby the main road as ease for access. The Ylang Ylang tree is understood to start flowering by 4-5 years after. The peak season is every January to May.
AnaoTR2,The only town in the country which produces Ylang-ylang oil extract, Anao produces a wide variety of products from the flower such as soaps, perfumes, insect repellants, car fresheners and aromatherapy oil. Located at the Northwestern borders of Tarlac province, the municipality of Anao is blessed with fertile flatlands and perennial tropical weather suitable for the cultivation of Ylang Ylang trees.
AnaoTR3,In the center of the town near the Municipio or Presidencia is the (F-1935) Saint John Nepomucene Parish Church of Anao. Fr. Mike Marquez and Father Ricky Barayoga are its Parish Priest. It belongs to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarlac at Poblacion St., Anao 2310 Tarlac, Philippines, Titular: St. John Nepomucene, Feast on May 16 under the Vicariate of St. Rose of Lima.
AnaoTR4,Amidst the small town of Anao, Tarlac, is Kape Agape, a small community cafe inspired by the highest form of love ?agape? ? the love of God for man and of man for God. Located at the heart of town abundant with ylang-ylang trees, the cafe not only serves nourishing food for the tummy but also for the soul.
AnaoTR5,Right beside the church, Kape Agape used to be the St John Learning Center from 1992, the first pre-school in town. Last 2006, it was converted into a Kid?s Center. In 2015, Kape Agape was born. Even as a cafe, it continues its advocacy to teach its town people about caring for the environment, developing tourism and mental health. The interior is a venue for arts, painting or photography alike. Of course sharing the word of God continues.\
BambanTR1,A Glimpse of Rome in Tarlac. Goshen with European style (mainly Greco-Roman) inspired architecture located in Bamban, Tarlac. Goshen Resort and Hotel is the newest (and soon to be the most trending) attraction in Central Luzon. The main feature of the resort is its architecture and amenities that make you feel like you are in ancient Rome. And since it is situated in an area tucked away from the city, this 10-hectare resort surrounded by nature lets you have a romantic, elegant and tranquil relaxation.
BambanTR2,As you enter the resort, the first thing that will catch your attention is the huge ?Dambana ni Yahweh,? a replication of Ancient Rome?s Colosseum. The swimming pool area is also a faithful representation of Roman architecture, surrounded by columns with intricate sculptural designs and an all-white theme.
BambanTR3,Goshen Resort has accommodation available for couples, small groups, families, and backpackers. The rooms are spacious and cozy with a lot of wood furnishings and earth colors. You will feel like you are in a country home while feeling pampered like a true Roman king or queen. Besides the relaxation, the resort also has some activities for visitors to enjoy. Other facilities include a farm, a basketball court, function halls, and ATV.
BambanTR4,This newly opened picnic/mountain farm, located in Bamban, Tarlac, will give you an unobstructed and a very good view of the stunning Mt Arayat and the Zambales mountains. And it is only 30 minutes from pampanga and an hour from Manila. The place is so much relaxing, with a wide vast of green sceneries, and it also has an overlooking view of pampanga! A perfect retreat place within the city.  Another excellent campsite near Gazebo View Park is Bella Montana Fruit Farm. While the road leading up to the farm may be off-road, the reward is a stunning and unobstructed view.
BambanTR5,Bella Montana Fruit Farm offers campers a spacious area adorned with lush green grass and scattered trees, creating a refreshing and inviting atmosphere. This picturesque setting provides campers with ample space to relax and unwind amidst nature?s beauty.
BambanTR6,At the top of the mountain is the Bamban Grotto of Our Lady of Lourdes, located in Bamban,Tarlac. It is one of the sacred places people visit during Holy Week and requires to climb the 168 steps to reach the grotto. Watch until the end of the video to see also the 3 magnificent crosses at the very top of the hill.
BambanTR7,Bamban WWII Museum (Bamban Museum for short) is a community museum dedicated to the history of Bamban and its environs with a particular interest in WWII History. Established by Rhonie C. Dela Cruz, the chairman of the Bamban Historical Society in 2005, the museum housed extensive collections of artefacts, relics, pictorial images of WWII in the Bamban-Clark area from American and Japanese sources, WWII combat films in the Bamban-Clark area as well as the Battle of Bataan, and books, maps, articles and papers from the US National Archives.
BambanTR8,There is also a special collection for the WWII veterans of Bamban consisting of personal papers, photos and related items. The Museum has several facilities including exhibit halls, a library, the Bamban WWII Heroes Project hall, and Pinatubo stone tablets WWII memorials located inside the premises. These memorials include Pvt. Melencio Figueroa, 2nd Lt. James H. Hart and Staff Sgt. Eugene Zingheim, Bamban Battalion, Aeta Squadron 30, the Japanese Kembu memorial, and the American Divisions (40th, 43rd, 38th and 6th Divisions) in the Battle of Bamban Hills. Bamban Museum is located along the old MacArthur Highway on what is now the Municipal Road in Barangay Lourdes, Bamban, Tarlac. Bamban and Bamban Hills used to be one of the toughest battlefields of Luzon during WWII.
BambanTR9,It is generally open from Monday to Friday; 9 am to 4 pm. Special appointments can be secured by prior call, text or email for certain availability even for Saturday and Sunday. Since the pandemic and the community lockdown imposed by the Philippine Government, the Museum has been implementing strict public safety protocols for a limited number of visitors. However, as Bamban Museum is privately owned, it is recommended that visitors secure prior schedules or appointments first, especially for group visitors and guests.
BambanTR10,A tunnel under twin mountains here used by Japanese invaders is being developed into a museum for teaching children about World War II. Called Onishi Tunnel or Onishi Shrine, the tunnel is located at Sitio Panaisan in Barangay San Nicolas here. It used to serve as a communications office and naval headquarters of the Japanese Imperial Army that occupied the Philippines during World War II. American soldiers and Filipino guerrillas failed to detect its presence in the mountains.
BambanTR11,Built on orders by Major Gen. Tsukada, these ?protective installations are probably the most elaborate and extensive system of caves and tunnel defense of the Japanese, was built in the hope of preventing the Americans from utilizing the Clark Air Field during the Second World War. Japanese person use the cave as the hide out of their troops. According to the municipality of Bamban, Tarlac the japanese cave is one of the evidence of war againts american and japanese war.
BambanTR12,Sto. Ni? Parish of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarlac was established on --. It is located in the Municipality of Bamban, Province of Tarlac. The Parish Fiesta is celebrated every last Sunday of January. Sitting at the heart of the town of Bamban is a Catholic church dedicated to Santo Ni?. Santo Ni? Parish Church or better known to many as the Bamban Church is located in Barangay Santo Ni?. Interestingly, the church is canonically founded in 1812 by the Augustinian missionaries who arrived in Bamban in 1700s. The current church was founded in 1936 but just like most churches in Tarlac and nearby provinces, Santo Ni? Parish was heavily destroyed during the second world war. Not to mention the devastating fate of the town in 1991 when Mount Pinatubo erupted flooding Bamban and other towns with Lahar. The calamity left people of Bamban no other option but to abandon the place and evacuate to a higher ground, most particularly the Dapdap Resettlement area. *The church was not affected by the Lahar flow as the area is situated on higher ground.
BambanTR13,The facade of Santo Ni? Parish features a front arch with the image of Santo Ni?. It has a symmetrical design that features a twin bell tower while the most portions were adorned by stained glass windows. Outside, you?ll see a spacious area with little landscape and a shrine depicting the image of crucified Christ in Golgotha. *There used to be an old bell in the front yard too. 
BambanTR14,The interior of the church is equally stunning. It features a spacious alter with interesting little details. It has no grandeur retablo and features a huge image of Crucified Christ on the center with the image of Santo Ni? placed at the bottom. *The church used to have an ornate retablo on the center niche. The ceiling has exposed wooden beams while each pier features a Marian image or a saint.
CamilingTR1,A historical building built around 18th century, the Catholic Church of Camiling was destroyed and rebuilt in the 1880s after a surge of major earthquake. The centuries-old Roman Catholic Church and Convent have been declared historical sites by the National Historical Commission in 1994. The Church was the death place of General Pedro Pedroche and his men in the hands of Francisco Makabulos. The current church had been transferred to the then Camiling Catholic School's Gymnasium before the construction of a new Camiling church were constructed beside the old ruins. The old church was then planned to be transformed into a museum. This is the oldest church ever built in the province of Tarlac. It has a 500 meter war tunnel underground constructed since the colonial era with an exit going to a remote area near Camiling River and was used by the Japanese as hiding spot during the World War II but most of its part has then caved in.
CamilingTR2,Had been built after the Philippine revolution by the revolutionaries attempt to Filipinize the Church. This is the second church built by Gregorio Aglipay, the first one being in Paniqui.
CamilingTR3,The old house of Maria Clara. A part of a house where Leonor Rivera dwells. Several priceless artifacts belonging to hers, immortalized by Noli Me Tangere as Maria Clara and even her late admirer, the national hero Jose Rizal had been exhibited on glass.this museum had a copy of some several things belonging to Dr. Jose Rizal but what is the best is this museum had the only museum in the Philippines had a copy of the original novel of Noli Me Tangere and El Filibusterismo.but besides the Luneta park they also had this literature of Rizal
CamilingTR4,A wide plaza complex that features various sports fields, a park, a playground, an auditorium and a wide grassy field. Maria Clara Town Plaza is the second widest park plaza in the province which composed of four hectares of lands suitable for some activities celebrated by the municipality and some schools of Camiling. At the side of the municipal plaza you can find vendors selling products of Camiling. From farming supplies to cultural items like Salakot and Balanggot. There are also dealers of wood furniture. You can also find watermelon vendors and beautiful Ornamental plants selling at the side of the plaza with low prices.
CamilingTR5,The Saint Michael the Archangel Parish Church of Camiling was built in 2009. With a total floor area of 2,200 square meters, the church features a plethora of intricately designed stained glass windows depicting, aside from Jesus Christ and the Virgin Mary, the angels. It is located besides the Camiling Catholic School. It is also one of the most attractive church in Tarlac. The Camiling Catholic School and the Camiling Catholic Church ruins are beside the said church.
CamilingTR6,Pias Falls is located in Tarlac province, Barangay Papaac Camiling. Amongst the waterfalls in Tarlac, this is probably the least famous because its beauty only comes out during the rainy season. Its waters could be from the famous Ubod Falls or Timmanguyob Falls but not enough to create a perfect torrent during summer. 
CapasTR1,The Capas National Shrine is located in Brgy. Aranguren in Tarlac City with an estimated 54 hectares of parkland. The shrine has a 70-meter towering obelisk that surpasses any tall establishment around the area while seemingly aiming its pointed edge into the vast blue sky. The gigantic obelisk is also surrounded by a long, semi-circular black marble with the names of fallen soldiers deeply engraved into it. It is a commemorative act to honor the sacrifices of our fellow Filipino and American soldiers who suffered from the infamous Bataan Death March. The mighty pillar has been standing in the municipality of Capas for 30 years now, but the trees around it are still evergreen. The number of trees that stand firm in that area is believed to be as many as those who gave their lives to enjoy the freedom that we have today. If you ever find yourself questioning the story of the past or contemplating the events of the present, you may come and visit the National Shrine in Capas. Nevertheless, the park is not as flashy or as decorative compared to other parks in the city, but it holds a very important historical story that cannot be lost or forgotten.
CapasTR2,The Capas Death March Monument is an inverted V structure designed as a memorial place for Filipino war heroes. It is situated along McArthur Highway, which makes it perfectly situated in a place where tourists can easily access. When you visit Tarlac and the shrine, recollect and reflect on the events of the grueling 106-kilometer death march and honor the lives of those who suffered in the devastating prison walk.
CapasTR3,The Defenders Hall is a mini-museum in Capas National Shrine that offers a collection of photographs during the Bataan Death March. The small museum has several paintings that depict the life of Filipinos under the terrible hands of Japanese soldiers. It is open from Monday to Sunday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., so make sure to stop by and appreciate the war memorabilia displayed in it.
CapasTR4,Mount Telakawa is the epitome of a mountain that is too challenging to climb. It is situated in Capas, Tarlac, and has received numerous top ratings and feedback from adventurous mountaineers and trekkers. The mountain is set at the foot of Mt. Pinatubo, with an elevation of 645 meters above sea level. It is considered, among all the other mountains in Tarlac, as ?the best alternative mountain destination? for Mt. Pinatubo because of its intense trail track. Although there is a safe route for trekkers, many mountaineers rate their hiking experience to a hard level. It is not as famous as Mt. Pinatubo, but the view from the mountain?s summit, above sea level, is beyond marvelous. You can see the breathtaking view of Mt. Arayat and Crow Valley upon reaching the top. It is indeed a worthy climb for all wayfarers. If you ever wish to experience this coolest and unforgettable trekking experience, it will only cost you a 100 peso entrance fee per person and a 350 eco-tour guide fee good enough for five persons.
CapasTR5,The Bueno Hot Spring is a spa garden located in the municipality of Capas, on the northern side of Crow Valley. It has two concrete pools that offer warm baths for its local and foreign visitors with an estimated temperature of 45 to 49 degrees centigrade. It is relatively known as a place that can take away all the worry and stress brought by the bustling city life. Some locals around the area, surprisingly, believed that the pools could even heal some illnesses. However, none of this is proven true, but this place is certainly a must-visit.
ConcepcionTR1,Concepcion Town Plaza is a park in Concepcion, Tarlac, Central Luzon. Concepcion Town Plaza is situated nearby to the government office Office of the Vice Mayor and the town hall Concepcion Municipal Hall
ConcepcionTR2,The Immaculate Conception Parish Church was built in the mid-1800s under the supervision of Fr. Guillermo Masnou. But when the original Baroque church was renovated in 1893 under the supervision of Fr. Fernando Vasquez, it took on a more Neo-Romanesque style.It is located at Brgy. San Nicolas Poblacion, Concepcion, Tarlac, Philippines.
ConcepcionTR3,The church was once again renovated from 2005 till 2007. Its current structure is made of concrete reinforced with steel. Unlike the front half of the church that is also covered with red bricks, the back half with the dome is made of plain concrete painted a pale yellowish cream. Twin bell towers, each with three tiers, flank the main church building. A portico covers the church's wide entryway. In contrast to the facade, which is far from plain but is not particularly grand, the Santuario de la Inmaculada Conception?s interiors seem much more opulent.
ConcepcionTR4,Rich patterns adorn the ceiling, leading towards the deep arched niche at the altar that bears the image of Our Lady. This niche, which stands before an elaborately patterned wall of red, green and gold, is positioned beneath the dome of the church. In turn, the dome and its supporting arches are likewise resplendently painted. Under the dome?s cap are windows with colored glass panes that cast light down onto the Our Lady. The Sanctuario honors the Solemnity of Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception on December 8 each year.
ConcepcionTR5,Sitting quietly at a parcel of land in Concepcion, Tarlac is a stately old mansion built during the pre-war days of the city. Painted in blinding white and striking reds, the structure stands proudly across a sprawling yard dotted with trees and carpeted in grass. Welcome to the Bal?Aquino, the Aquino Ancestral House. Tarlac is the Aquino family?s baluarte. This is the province where Ninoy grew to prominence as a politician. The guy was a whiz when it comes to politics; being a mayor at 22, a vice governor of the province at 27, and finally, its governor at 29. His record still stands as being the youngest senator of the country at age 34.
ConcepcionTR6,But of course, however gifted one might be, one still cannot achieve such a feat without a family already into politics. And it is such with the Aquino clan?his grandfather, one of Emilio Aguinaldo?s general, and his father, the Speaker of the House of the Representatives.
ConcepcionTR7,The Aquino Ancestral House is not as old as the numerous bahay na bato in Vigan City, being completed only in 1938. The architectural style is somewhat European in nature with its grand porch and neo-classical columns. It was designed by an architect from Laguna but was heavily supervised by Apung Ignu, Ninoy?s father, during its construction. Inside, everything is made of wood?unpainted red narra hardwoods to be exact. The second floor, most especially, blazes with the warmth of the material. The furniture are crafted in duquit Betis, a woodcarving style from the neighboring province of Pampanga where the now-famous Betis Crafts originated.
GeronaTR1,JSJ GOAT FARM is located at Barangay Caturay, Gerona, Tarlac, about 140 km north of Manila. It was established in June 2001 with less than 10 goats, as a hobby. After a few years of doing goat farming and seeing the potential of it, they are now doing the business full-time and became their primary. They have around 300 heads of breeder goats and sheep utilizing a total of 10 hectares of improved pasture. JSJ GOAT FARM is a family enterprise. It is owned by Jeffrey and Kathleen Lim. With this new field of business, they first started taking care of native goats, before eventually acquiring purebred goats to upgrade the genes of their animals. Moreover, they started importing goats from Australia in March 2005 by joining the first GOAT BUYING MISSION of their group, Goat, and Sheep of Producers Association of Tarlac (GASPAT). Now, they have various goat breeds namely Boar, Anglo Nubian, Saanen, and British Alpines and for sheep they have Dorpers.
GeronaTR2,Saint Catherine was one of the most important saints in the religious culture of the late Middle Ages, and arguably considered the most important of the virgin martyrs, a group including St. Agnes, Margaret of Antioch, Saint Barbara, Saint Lucy, Valerie of Limoges and many others. Her power was an intercessor was renowned and firmly established in most versions of her hagiography, in which she specifically entreats Christ at the moment of her death to answer the prayers of those who remember the martyrdom and invoke her name. It is the inspiration of the parish
GeronaTR3,This church was built in the year 2017, the La Sagrada Familia Parish is well known with its detailed design. Its altar was also a part of a big historical event, when Pope Francis visited the Philippines in the year 2015, He kissed the altar made of marble that made it very significant to the history of the Christian faith. The design of the church is made by the late Rev. Fr. Alex Bautista (1969-2020), who also designed the remarkable church of Saint Jose Maria Escriva . Saint Jose Maria Escriva Parish is also known as the first church in Asia dedicated to the saint. This two magnificent churches are also located at the town of Gerona, Tarlac.
GeronaTR4,Josemaria Escriva Parish. Known locally as Parokya ni San Josemaria Escriva or the Diocesan Shrine of St. Josemaria Escriva, it is the first Church in the country and in Asia dedicated to the Saint. The St. Josemaria Escriva Parish is unique for its ?drive-through? view of the Blessed Sacrament.
LaPazTR1,General Francisco Macabulos Ancestral Home is a memorial in La Paz, Tarlac, Central Luzon. General Francisco Macabulos Ancestral Home is situated nearby to the sports venue La Paz Covered Court and La Paz Community Hospital.
LaPazTR2,This historical church, also known as the Nuestra Se?ra De La Paz Y Buen Viaje, was built in 1870 with the help of the Spanish friars. This church is now known as the Our Lady of Peace and Good Voyage Church, the direct translation of its Spanish name. A temporary church and convent was built in 1847 by Fr. Candido Gonzales. It was made mostly of wood, bricks and tabique pampango.
LaPazTR3,Designed based on a Neoclassical-style, the current La Paz Church stands today as one of the centuries-old attractions in the city of Iloilo. This church, constructed from 1870 to 1874, was made of light materials and had to be renovated several times as the years passed. The most notable development of the La Paz church was in 1995 (in its 125th year) with the management of Msgr. Melencio V. Fegarido. In fact, his achievements were commended by the City Government and its people by placing a marker on one side of the church.
LaPazTR4,Martinez-macabulos park is located on lapaz tarlac in which is dedicated to the first governor of tarlac namely Gen. Francisco Macabulos.
MayantocTR1,Visitors shall trek a 45 minute to an hour under the forest canopy while enjoying the various flora and fauna of the area. The Kiti-Calao falls is a hidden paradise with its 20 feet drop, lush green surrounding and its crystal clear water that can be enjoyed by tourists.
MayantocTR2,In Sitio Calao Barangay San Jose, a hidden waterfall is now a hiking sensation in town and to nearby provinces. If trekking or waterfall chasing is your kind of thing, Kalaw Falls is a perfect destination. A short stopover to this place when visiting nearby provinces isn't a bad idea. In my case, I visited this waterfalls prior to my return to the city to relieve myself of stress. Calao Falls (Sitio Calao) was named from the species of beautiful bird Kalaw which once was rampant in the area. This species is now endangered and our guide told us there were only a few to be in the area. This waterfall once had a deep plunge pool suitable for swimming and diving. It was the typhoon Queil (Kiel) in 2011 that made its deep basin shallow due to soil and rock deposits eroded from upstream. Despite the dramatic change in the landscape, the place still offers impressive natural beauty.
MayantocTR3,Climbing the granite rock of Calao Falls will lead you to a small waterfall where you can submerge and enjoy its chilly water after a short trek. According to our guide, this mini-waterfall also had a deep basin. We were sad not to set an eye on the grandeur of Calao Falls.
MayantocTR4,It is a concrete stairways leading to a leveled hill where stands majestically the seat of the local government ? the Mayantoc Municipal Hall. Facing the building, is the monument of our National hero Dr. Jose P.Rizal, serving as an inspiration to our leaders, that love of country is foremost but second only to God.As you go up, you can pause to admire the beauty of Aquino Park, with its canopied trees that serve as shade for children and adults enjoying the playground and the much visited Jurassic Park.
MayantocTR5,The ANZAP Twin Falls, which are formed by the Matibya and Piccan Rivers, have an impressive height of approximately 200 feet. This eco-tourism destination provides visitors with a unique opportunity to experience the local flora, fauna, and forest trails. The ANZAP Twin Falls area was developed in the 1970s and is known for its rich forestry, making it one of Tarlac's top hiking destinations.
MayantocTR6,The surroundings are filled with lush greenery and natural beauty. For many beginners, trips to the falls may require overnight camping. The journey involves crossing a river and navigating a few challenging trails. Along the way, you'll encounter stunning views of the river and mountains, providing great spots for rest.
MayantocTR7,The ANZAP Twin Falls are situated behind the ASEAN-New Zealand Afforestation Project in Mayantoc, Tarlac. They are likely the tallest waterfalls in Tarlac province. The local government is currently exploring sustainable tourism initiatives with a focus on eco-adventure to promote this hidden gem of Tarlac.
MayantocTR8,The Nambalan River is a natural attraction located in Mayantoc, Tarlac. This town is often referred to as the Summer Capital of Tarlac due to its location in the hilly part of the province, offering a variety of natural tourist spots.
MayantocTR9,Visitors can reach the Nambalan River via a narrow concrete walkway that provides picturesque views of verdant rice fields on both sides, lush foliage, coconut trees, and the blue mountains in the distance. Tarlac may not be as famous as other tourist destinations, but it has a lot of natural wonders to offer.
MayantocTR10,Nambalan River is often described as a paradise in Mayantoc, known for its crystal-clear water and calm river, making it perfect for swimming. The absence of strong currents ensures that tourists can enjoy a relaxing and safe swimming experience. Additionally, the river is surrounded by stunning mountain scenery, adding to its charm as a natural attraction.
MoncadaTR1,The town plaza named after one of the Moncada?s most illustrious sons, the Luis Morales Park is the show window of the town.
MoncadaTR2,Saint Raymund Nonnatus Parish of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarlac was established on 1804. It is located in the Municipality of Moncada, Province of Tarlac. The Parish Fiesta is celebrated every 31st day of August. The devotion to San Ramon Nonato in Moncanda began when a farmer found in what is now Brgy Tubectubang. a black wooden bust of a man, which believed to be part of a santo (holy image) the farmer brought the image to the local Spanish priest for identification. The fraile examined it and exclaimed Este es el rebulto de San Ramon Nonato (This is the image of San Ramon Nonato). Don Vicente Tintiangco contacted the finder.
MoncadaTR3,For certain remuneration the farmer willingly gave the bust to Don Vicente for care and Safekeeping. Don Vicente then hired a sculptor to supply the missing torso and legs and engaged a seamstress to sew a maroon Habito for the statue.
MoncadaTR4,The Original image of Apo San Ramon Nonato is now under the care of the Mendoza Family where the image is permanently enshrined and where passing devotees would drop by to light candles and offer prayers. When the parish was established, a replica of Apo San Ramon with fair skin was commission for the parish for veneration of the faithful.
MoncadaTR5,It is an old wood and brick structure built during the Spanish era, situated adjacent to the public plaza along the national highway. It is today considered a landmark not only because of its colonial structure but also of its historical significance.
PaniquiTR1,The town of Paniqui in Tarlac boasts Asia's first and only parish dedicated to Saint Faustina Kowalska, the visionary of the Divine Mercy. Established on February 24, 2003, the parish was solemnly dedicated on May 27, 2012, and it now houses a relic of the Polish nun. The church's exterior features earthy tones, stained-glass windows, and a prominent center window portraying the image of the Divine Mercy. Inside, the church is adorned with white walls, a striking retablo, and intricate carvings, making it a breathtaking sight.
PaniquiTR2,The parish shrine commemorates St. Faustina's Feast Day on October 5, the date of her death in 1938. She was canonized by St. John Paul II in 2000 and is known as the Humble Instrument. Despite her humble background and lack of education, St. Faustina recorded messages from Jesus in her notebooks, sparking a movement emphasizing Jesus' love, mercy, and the importance of complete trust in Him. The shrine also popularized The 3 o'Clock Habit, a prayer observed at 3 PM to mark the Hour of Great Mercy when Jesus sacrificed His life to save humanity. St. Faustina Parish is a remarkable Tarlac church, known for its dedication to St. Faustina and its stunning architecture, making it a must-visit Tarlac City tourist attraction.
PaniquiTR3,The church dedicated to St. Rose of Lima in Paniqui, Tarlac, was declared a parish in 1804. St. Rose's image is prominently displayed on the church's facade, positioned just above the entrance. Despite having only three niches, the church's retablo is a massive altarpiece made of dark wood with golden embellishments. The central and largest niche holds the image of the Resurrected Christ, flanked by Our Lady of Lourdes and St. Rose of Lima on either side. Elaborate stained-glass windows surrounding the altar and along the side walls contribute to the church's ethereal atmosphere.
PaniquiTR4,While St. Rose's feast day is celebrated on August 30th in most places worldwide, the parish in Paniqui honors her on August 23rd each year. Her Novenario, a series of nine-day Novena Masses leading up to her feast day, takes place from August 14th to the 22nd. St. Rose of Lima is the patron saint of embroiderers, gardeners, florists, and those persecuted for their faith. Hailing from Lima, Peru, she holds the distinction of being the first person from the Americas to be declared a saint.
PuraTR1,St. Antoninus Parish of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarlac was established on 1887. It is located in the Municipality of Pura, Province of Tarlac. The Parish Fiesta is celebrated every 10th day of May. St. Antoninus Parish welcomes Christians and those who seek to understand Christianity in the Pura area. Our aim is to make contact with and encourage others to join us in our life-enhancing Christian journey. St. Antoninus Parish at Pura, Tarlac is a friendly Christian community where we welcome others to join us in our worship and service to God. Our emphasis is on learning and understanding the Bible and following the example of Jesus and his followers.
PuraTR2,The vision of St. Antoninus Parish is to make an impact for God, here in Pura, Tarlac by helping people understand the enriching messages of eternal hope given to us by Jesus Christ through His words and deeds. 
RamosTR1,In this small town of Ramos, located in the heart of Poblacion Center stands a magnificent structure, which inspired anyone who lays a sight on it. How the church became a Shrine is a story of a very long way of inspiration and courage of the priest who was installed in this humble town. The Shrine of St. Therese of the Child Jesus in Ramos, Tarlac, stands as a magnificent structure with a rich history. From its humble beginnings as a small chapel during World War II, it has evolved into a remarkable sanctuary. The church's journey was marked by the dedication of various priests, culminating in the visionary leadership of Rev. Fr. Ronald Thomas Archie Cortez.
RamosTR2,Under Fr. Cortez's guidance, a new church was constructed, and the Shrine was elevated to a Shrine Category in 2004. It became a pilgrimage site, known for the intercession of St. Therese, attracting devotees from across the region. Additionally, the Shrine was the birthplace of the Congregation of the Servants of the Risen Christ Community, founded by Fr. Cortez. Today, the Shrine of St. Therese of the Child Jesus is not only a place of worship but also a symbol of hope and transformation, leaving a lasting impact on the faithful and the community it serves.
RamosTR3,Location: San Raymundo, Ramos, Tarlac
Description: The coconut and cashew plantation are the attractions of Hacienda Cojuangco. The place is perfect for group picnics and adventures.
RamosTR4,Ramos Town Plaza is next to Ramos and is located in Province of Tarlac, Central Luzon, Philippines. Ramos Town Plaza has a length of 0.28 kilometres. 
SanClementeTR1,DUEG o Carabao sa wikang Pangasinan. Ito ay isang tanawin mula sa tuktok ng bundok kung saan makikita ang tunay na kapayapaan dulot ng magandang tanawin ng kalikasan. Ang Sitio na ito ay tunay na tahanan ng mga katutubong tao. Ang lugar na ito ay sulit puntahan dahil sa sariwang hangin, kabutihang-loob ng mga tao, at kamangha-manghang tanawin.
SanClementeTR2,Canding Falls is located at barangay Maasin, San Clemente, Tarlac and it is one of the best eco-tourism and tourist spots in Tarlac due to its accessibility. Hiking to Canding Falls is relatively easy with a 1km walk from Canding river jump-off point. The water is very cold which makes it the best go-to place during summer or hot days. There are also jumping points where 20ft is the highest, perfect for the deep waters of the river for safe diving and jumping. Overall, Canding falls is a great place where you can feel nice cold water, see many sceneries, and most importantly enjoy the beauty of the whole Canding falls
SanClementeTR3,Situated in northwestern part of Tarlac, Mt. Damas was only opened earlier this decade by mountaineers exploring the Zambales-Tarlac mountain range. It borders the town of Camiling, San Clemente, and Mayantoc. Famous for its ?cardiac? trails, river crossings, rappelling, and rock scrambling, Mt. Damas offers more than the usual mountain hike, despite its low elevation.
SanClementeTR4,The Timangguyob Falls is one of San Clemente Tarlac?s best-kept secrets. A breath taking waterfall tucked away in the midst of nowhere. The water runs down on an incredibly large boulder that has been carved and molded by nature over many years of exposure to the constant flow of water pouring from a top at the height of 50 feet.
SanClementeTR5,Saint Jude Thaddeus Parish of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarlac was established on 1962. It is located in the Municipality of San Clemente, Province of Tarlac. The Parish Fiesta is celebrated every 28th day of October.
SJTR1,A sprawling center of outdoor activities, the Recreational Complex is meant to be enjoyed with friends and family. You can choose from an array of adventures both on land and in water. The complex is outfitted with two large kiddie pools and an olympic?sized swimming pool. The numerous ponds are scattered in the park are open for kayaking and fishing. The recreational complex welcomes campers to stay in the night and sleep under the stars. By daylight, activities like zip lining, mountain biking, airsoft, and dune buggy and ATV rides await.
SJTR2,Monasterio de Tarlac is the home of the Reliquary of the True Cross of Christ.  The Relic of the Holy Cross, authenticated by a papal seal, is under the care of the Servants of the Risen Christ (SRC) Monastic Community and is encased in a golden Arquette.
SJTR3,The Abelling People are of Aeta descent and are known for their  knowledge and familiarity of the vast forests of San Jose. Their community in Sitio Baag, San Jose, offers homestay options for tourists before and after their hike through the scenic panorama of the western portion of the province. Indigenous presentations from the cultural community are also showcased to visitors willing to stay overnight.
SJTR4,Saipan Beach is located in San Jose, Tarlac. This is just along the way going to Monasterio de Tarlac. It is a good stop over after the Monasterio visit. Every summer, residents of San Jose, Tarlac are working together to put rocks around a nearby river to convert it into a resort for kids and adults alike. It has a water area both for kids and adults and for those who can swim. Saipan Beach is not really a beach, it is a river. According to the locals the owners came from Saipan that's why they named it Saipan Beach. The natural water of the river comes from the mountain and the river is wide enough for a lot of people to enjoy. If the weather's hot you may get to cool off in the river. 
SMTR1,Our Lady of Remedies Parish of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarlac was established on 1934. It is located in the Municipality of San Manuel, Province of Tarlac. Our Lady of Remedies Parish Church of San Manuel, Tarlac 2019 Solemnly Blessed on January 16, 2010 Sitio Champaca and puroks 1-7 of Santa Maria, San Manuel, Tarlac from or along MacArthur Highway (San Manuel, Tarlac section) Barangay Santa Maria, San Manuel, Tarlac 15.8017, 120.6097, San Manuel, Tarlac, Tarlac Province from or along the MacArthur Highway or Manila North Road Philippine highway network (Note: Judge Florentino Floro, the owner, to repeat, Donor Florentino Floro of all these photos hereby donate gratuitously, freely and unconditionally Judge Floro all these photos to and for Wikimedia Commons, exclusively, for public use of the public domain, and again without any condition whatsoever).
SITR1,Pikkan Falls is located in Barangay Calipayan, Sta. Ignacia, Tarlac. Nestled in a small patch of the forested area of the village, these four waterfalls roughly 20 meters apart have been frequently visited by locals and tourists from nearby towns and provinces.
SITR2,The municipality of Santa Ignacia has many beautiful spots to be proud of. One of these spots is Mt. Paniknol that can be found in Brgy. San Sotero.
SITR3,Santa Ignacia Plaza is a retail area in Municipality of Santa Ignacia, Tarlac, Central Luzon located on Romulo Highway. Santa Ignacia Plaza is situated nearby to the shopping center Sun Plaza - Santa Ignacia and Sta. Ignacia Police Station.
SITR4,This iconic parish church is one of Sta. Ignacia, Tarlac?s more recognizable buildings. Dedicated to Our Lady of Fatima, this place of pilgrimage was built in 1949. Its facade features a huge image of Our Lady of Fatima, right above the entryway and beneath the simple yet towering white cross that crowns the church. Two arched stained-glass windows, one depicting the cross and another depicting the Host and chalice, flank the arched doorway. And just as it is on the outside, the church interior is mostly pristine white.
VTR1,Located in Victoria, Dragon Fruit Farm is a three hectare plantation boasting rich dragon fruit plants positioned 1.5 meters apart from each other. It is a must see tourist destination especially in the months of July ? October.
VTR2,Red Slab is known internationally for its intricately made native ceramic goods. Its carbonized jar designs intersect traditional techniques with modernist silhouettes, and showcases stamp engravings and carbonized terracotta ware effects. The humble factory is also a tourist hotspot and offers free demonstrations for visitors.
VTR3,Canarem Lake in Victoria town of Tarlac is considered as one of the most important wetlands in Luzon. It is habitat to several water bird species including threatened and endemic ones like the Philippine duck.
VTR4,Barangay palac palac is the location of the oldest and the biggest tree in Victoria and they call it Victoria's century tree Our ancestors said that there were a lot of Acasia trees growing in the center of the barrio. And this tree is one of the oldest and the strongest who have survived after alot of natural and man-made calamities throughout the centuries
And maybe this is the oldest Acasia tree in the Philippines.